# Musical-Instrument-Tuning-Assistant : Project Overview

Final year Capstone Project

Guide : Dr.M.J.Venkatarangan

Team : Manoj, Vamshi, Abhijith

# Features:  
- INPUT : 
  1. MODE:  
   a. Pitch Detection: Detects the pitch of the sound generated by the Instrument.  
   b. Digital Tanpura: Generates the sound of INSTRUMENT OF CHOICE specified by the User. 
  2. TARGET PITCH:  
    - Pitch (/frequency) at which user wants to play the Music. 
  3. INSTRUMENT OF CHOICE 
  4. AUDIO FROM THE INSTRUMENT
  
- OUTPUT :
  1. Target pitch and real time pitch accuracy display on the LCD. 
  2. Syntzhesized Sound will be played from the Speaker to tune the specified user Instrument. 
 
# Algorithm: 
- Audio I/O 
- Signal-to-Noise ratio estimation 
- Pitch contour generation (and plotting, if needed) 
- Denoising pitch contour to remove abrupt variations 
- Generate the Initial pitch estimate 
- Focus the pitch contour generated based on initial pitch estimate 
- Histogram (/group counts) calculation 
- Extracting the resulting pitch 
- Providing the information about the corrective action to be taken
 
# Progress:  
- Real-time Pitch detection framework is ready (in Python and MATLAB) 
  - Audio I/O 
  - Signal-to-Noise ratio estimation (Not reliable) (Replaced this with signal energy)
  - Pitch contour generation (and plotting, if needed) 
  - Initial pitch estimate
  - Denoising the pitch contour generated  
  - Histogram (/group counts) calculation 
  - Extracting the resulting pitch 
  - Providing information on corrective action required
- Preliminary testing showed that the program works very well for veena and violin tuning
- Digital Tanpura incorporated
- GUI development and testing completed
 
# Challenges:  
- [SOLVED] The execution time (on average) is 3~4 seconds for 1s of audio input. This would make real time implementation difficult
- [SOLVED] Silence detection. (Pitch estimation carried out even when there is no signal from instrument)
- On average the pitch estimate has a deviation from ideal result of about 1Hz. Though small, we want to reduce this error
- [SOLVED] Identifying different Octaves and Swaras (Sa, Pa, Sa#)
- Infrequent large deviations in pitch estimated. Increased testing should help eliminate this issue
- Cross validation with auto-correlation method failed due to inconsistency in auto-correlation results

# Tasks pending:
1. Translating code to hardware compatible form
2. Rigorous field testing 
